---
title: "Opacity and Financial Secrecy: Understanding their Impacts on Fiscal and Social Stability in Colombia"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2022-05-01-Opacidad-y-secreto-financiero-en-Panama
excerpt: 'The aim of this document is to provide the reader with an introduction to the nature of Illicit Financial Flows (IFF) and to clarify how countries like Colombia are affected by financial secrecy and opacity operations in international banking centers like Panama'
date: 2023-11-01
venue: 'In Pabón C. and Silva C. (Eds.), Challenges of Global Taxation: Towards an Inclusive, Sustainable and Equitable Global Taxation for Latin America and the Caribbean. Fedesarrollo.'
paperurl: 'https://www.repository.fedesarrollo.org.co/handle/11445/4493'
citation: 'Pabón C. & Silva C. (Eds.). (2023). Desafíos de la tributación global: hacia una tributación global incluyente, sostenible y equitativa para América Latina y el Caribe. Bogotá: Fedesarrollo, 158 p.'
---

The aim of this document is to provide the reader with an introduction to the nature of Illicit Financial Flows (IFF) and to clarify how countries like Colombia are affected by financial secrecy and opacity operations in international banking centers like Panama. The innovative aspect of this work is that it seeks to frame the problem by combining two perspectives through which IFF have been approached. The first perspective is that of the so-called 'grey literature', reports from multilateral agencies attempting to evaluate the dynamics of IFF to make policy recommendations. The second perspective is that of academic literature on Panama's role in the dynamics of global financial secrecy and its impact on the welfare and fiscal sustainability of other countries like Colombia. It is identified that both Colombia and Panama have shortcomings in their legislation, their systems of control over IFF, and over commercial operations related to fraudulent invoicing. In this sense, it was found that leaks like the Pandora Papers, although providing incomplete and heterogeneous information, constitute inputs for the initiation of judicial, academic, and journalistic investigations that allow for the identification of tax evasion and money laundering schemes. Finally, it was found that academic literature supports the adoption of voluntary disclosure mechanisms for hidden wealth. These schemes tend to increase revenue, save the state resources in terms of pursuing evaders, and discourage subsequent tax evasion or avoidance. Keywords: Illicit financial flows, Pandora Papers, tax haven, fraudulent invoicing, tax evasion, shell companies.